---
layout: writing
title: "Postgres: how foreign keys work"
tags: [writing, pg]
last_updated: 2021-01-13
---
# Postgres: how foreign keys work

January 13, 2021 (draft)

Foreign key constraints are used to implement [referential integrity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Referential_integrity)
in a database.  Postgres' [documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.3/ddl-constraints.html#DDL-CONSTRAINTS-FK)
on foreign keys gives the following example:

> Say you have the product table that we have used several times already:
>
>```
> CREATE TABLE products (
>    product_no integer PRIMARY KEY,
>    name text,
>    price numeric
> );
> ```
> Let's also assume you have a table storing orders of those products. We want to ensure that the orders table only contains orders of products that actually exist. So we define a foreign key constraint in the orders table that references the products table:
> 
>```
> CREATE TABLE orders (
>    order_id integer PRIMARY KEY,
>    product_no integer REFERENCES products (product_no),
>    quantity integer
> );
>```
> Now it is impossible to create orders with product_no entries that do not appear in the products table.
> We say that in this situation the orders table is the referencing table and the products table is the referenced table. Similarly, there are referencing and referenced columns.

Also:

> We know that the foreign keys disallow creation of orders that do not relate to any products. But what if a product is removed after an order is created that references it? SQL allows you to handle that as well. Intuitively, we have a few options:
>
> * Disallow deleting a referenced product
> 
> * Delete the orders as well
>
> * Something else?

That's the user story of foreign keys.  In this post, I will describe what Postgres does behind
the scenes to make sure that the database maintains at all times the property described above
of a foreign key defined by the user.
